=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

holo-plugin-interface - API specification for Holo plugins

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Holo can leverage plugins to provision previously unknown entity types. For
example, given a hypothetical "FooSQL" database, someone could implement a
plugin for Holo that provisions FooSQL databases or database users. This
document describes the interface that Holo uses to find, invoke, and communicate
with its plugins.

This interface is deliberately designed around classic files and text streams,
so that it can easily be implemented even by shell scripts without needing to
resort to complex parser libraries.

This document describes B<version 3> of the Holo plugin interface.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to
be interpreted as described in L<RFC 2119|https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119>.

=head2 Plugin discovery

Each plugin MUST have an ID following the format C<[a-z0-9][a-z0-9-]*>. When
choosing the plugin ID, redundant verbs like C<manage> or C<provision> SHOULD
be avoided. A good plugin ID is just the name of the software being configured
by the plugin. For example, an appropriate plugin ID for the aforementioned
FooSQL plugin would be C<foosql>. The things provisioned MAY be referenced in
plural form if disambiguation is required. For example, if FooSQL is configured
by multiple plugins, appropriate plugin IDs could include C<foosql-databases>
and C<foosql-users>.

Plugins are not discovered automatically. They MUST be referenced in
F</etc/holorc> (see L<holorc(5)>) by adding the line:

    plugin $PLUGIN_ID

It is RECOMMENDED that plugins install a L<holorc(5)> snippet to achieve this:

    $ cat /etc/holorc.d/50-foosql
    # This file is part of the holo-foosql package.
    plugin foosql

Old versions of Holo (prior to 1.2) required that the F</etc/holorc> be
modified via L<holo-files(8)> through the use of post-install/upgrade/remove
scripts. This is no longer required if holorc snippets are used.

=head2 Runtime environment

Plugins MUST recognize the environment variable C<$HOLO_ROOT_DIR>: If this
variable exists, plugins SHALL assume that Holo is running in test mode. The
variable holds the path to a directory which contains a test scenario resembling
a normal root partition (at least the parts needed for the test scenario).

In test mode, plugins SHOULD NOT talk to system-level daemons or write files
outside the C<$HOLO_ROOT_DIR>. Appropriate mock implementations SHALL be used
instead. Modifying files below C<$HOLO_ROOT_DIR> is allowed.

=head3 HOLO_RESOURCE_DIR, HOLO_STATE_DIR, HOLO_CACHE_DIR

Plugins SHALL locate and store their data in the directories named by the
following environment variables:

=over 4

=item HOLO_RESOURCE_DIR (default: `/usr/share/holo/$PLUGIN_ID`)

Where plugins can find their resources. Holo will refuse to operate if the
resource directory does not exist, thus plugins SHOULD create the default
path at installation time.

=item HOLO_STATE_DIR (default: `/var/lib/holo/$PLUGIN_ID`)

Where plugins can store persistent state between runs of Holo. If the state
directory is missing, Holo will create it before calling the plugin executable.
However, plugins are encouraged to create the state directory at their
installation time if they are going to need it.

=item HOLO_CACHE_DIR (default: below `/tmp`)

Where plugins may store temporary data, such as results from an initial scan
operation. Holo will create this directory when it starts up, and clean it up
when it exits.

=back

Future versions of Holo may start to choose these paths differently (or allow
the user to do so), but the default values are stable and can safely be
communicated to users in documentation. Because these paths can be chosen by
Holo, plugins SHALL always use the paths in the environment variables rather
than trying to compute them by themselves. The paths are always given as
absolute paths, and are located below C<$HOLO_ROOT_DIR> during test cases.

=head2 The C<info> operation

The plugin binary is executed one or multiple times when Holo is run. The first
invocation is always with the single argument C<info>:

    PLUGIN_BINARY=/usr/lib/holo/holo-$PLUGIN_ID
    $PLUGIN_BINARY info

The plugin shall then report metadata about itself on stdout, as key-value
pairs in the form C<key=value>, with a newline after each value. The following
keys are recognized by Holo:

=over 4

=item C<MIN_API_VERSION>, C<MAX_API_VERSION> (required)

These two keys describe an interval of versions of this plugin interface that
the plugin is compatible with. Versions are single, positive integers. For
example:

    MIN_API_VERSION=3
    MAX_API_VERSION=5

Both values may be identical, of course. If they're not, then Holo will attempt
to choose a plugin interface version that works both for it and the plugin, and
announce that version to the plugin in subsequent operations through the
C<$HOLO_API_VERSION> environment variable. The plugin SHALL then conform to
this version of the plugin interface.

=back

All other keys are ignored.

=head2 The C<scan> operation

After C<info> always comes another invocation with the single argument C<scan>:

    $PLUGIN_BINARY scan

The plugin shall then scan its C<$HOLO_RESOURCE_DIR> for entities that it can
provision. Any errors encountered shall be reported on stderr. If any fatal
errors are encountered, the plugin shall exit with non-zero exit code.

At the end of scanning, the plugin shall provide on stdout a report for each of
the entities found, in the following form (this example being from the C<files>
plugin from core Holo):

    ENTITY: file:/etc/locale.gen
    store at: /var/lib/holo/base/etc/locale.gen
    SOURCE: /usr/share/holo/files/00-base/etc/locale.gen
    apply: /usr/share/holo/files/00-base/etc/locale.gen

Each line has the form C<key: value>. Most lines are informational content that
is not processed further by Holo (except for pretty-printing), and can be used
to convey any sort of useful information about the entity to the user. However,
keys with all capital letters are reserved for special semantics. Currently, the
following special keys are known:

=over 4

=item C<ENTITY>

The C<ENTITY> key starts a new entity. The value after the colon is the entity
ID as chosen by the plugin. The recommended format for entity IDs is
C<type:identifier>, with the type in singular form. For example, the
hypothetical C<foosql> plugin could report entities like
C<foosql-db:production> or C<foosql-user:sarah>.

Entity IDs MUST NOT look like filesystem paths, since Holo's interface uses
entity IDs and paths to resource files in the same place.

=item C<SOURCE>

The C<SOURCE> key names a resource file (below C<$HOLO_RESOURCE_DIR>) from
which the entity in question has been read. If multiple such files exist,
multiple C<SOURCE> lines can be printed.

This link is only used internally to resolve resource file arguments into the
entities defined by them. It is therefore considered good practice to list the
source files a second time as informational text, with appropriate lower-case
keys. The C<users-groups> plugin demonstrates this practice:

    ENTITY: group:sudo
    SOURCE: /usr/share/holo/users-groups/00-base.toml
    found in: /usr/share/holo/users-groups/00-base.toml
    with: type: system

=item C<ACTION>

Lines of the form C<ACTION: verb (reason)> are used when applying the entity
will do something else than provisioning it. The line shall contain a verb
describing the action taken, and a reason for doing so. For example, the
C<files> plugin uses the action verb C<Scrubbing> to signal that a deleted
configuration file is being cleaned up after.

    ENTITY: file:target/etc/targetfile-deleted.conf
    ACTION: Scrubbing (target was deleted)
    delete: target/var/lib/holo/files/base/etc/targetfile-deleted.conf

=back

The report for an entity ends at the next C<ENTITY: ID> line, or when EOF is
encountered.

If scanning for entities is expensive, plugins should cache results of their
scanning in C<$HOLO_CACHE_DIR> (as described above).

=head2 The C<apply> operation

If the user requests that one or multiple entities be provisioned (with the
C<holo apply> command), then for each of the selected entities, the
corresponding plugin will be called like this:

    $PLUGIN_BINARY apply $ENTITY_ID

During this operation, the plugin can reuse results from the previously
conducted scanning operation if they have been cached in C<$HOLO_CACHE_DIR>.
Informational output shall be printed on stdout, errors and warnings shall be
printed on stderr. This output will be passed on to the user directly. If an
error occurred during provisioning, the plugin shall exit with non-zero exit
code.

During this operation, the plugin process's file descriptor no. 3 is opened by
Holo, and the plugin can write the following messages into this FD to invoke
special behavior in Holo:

=over 4

=item C<"not changed\n">

The entity is already in the desired state, so no changes have been made. Holo
will format its output accordingly (at the time of this writing, by omitting the
entity from the output).

=item C<"requires --force to overwrite\n">

The entity was provisioned by this plugin, but has been changed by a user or
external application since then. Holo will output an error message indicating
that C<--force> is needed to overwrite these manual changes.

=item C<"requires --force to restore\n">

Same as above, but indicates that the entity was not just changed, but deleted
by a user or external application.

=back

=head2 The C<force-apply> operation

During the C<apply> operation, plugins shall refuse to provision entities that
appear to have been edited or deleted by the user or an external application.
However, when the plugin is called like this:

    $PLUGIN_BINARY force-apply $ENTITY_ID

Then the plugin shall overwrite any external changes to the selected entity and
bring it into the desired target state with all means possible. Otherwise, the
C<force-apply> operation works just like C<apply>.

=head2 The C<diff> operation

If the user requests that a diff be printed for one or multiple entities (with
the C<holo diff> command), then for each of the selected entities, the
corresponding plugin will be called like this:

    $PLUGIN_BINARY diff $ENTITY_ID

If the entity does not have a meaningful diff (e.g. for the C<run-scripts>
plugin), the plugin shall exit with zero exit code without doing anything.

Otherwise, two NUL-terminated filesystem paths must be printed on file
descriptor 3. The first file represents the state of the entity that will be
applied (or force-applied) by the plugin, the second file represents the current
state of the entity.

The plugin is allowed to return paths that do not exist in the file system, in
which case Holo will diff against `/dev/null` instead. `/dev/null` can also be
given explicitly instead of a file that is missing. (The first file will be
missing when the entity is orphaned, and the second file will be missing when
the entity was deleted by the user or an external program.)

For entities that are not backed by a file, the plugin is allowed to make up a
useful textual representation of the entity, and write appropriate files to the
C<HOLO_CACHE_DIR>. An example of this is the C<holo-users-groups> plugin.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<holo(8)>, L<holo-test(7)> (test runner for Holo plugins)

=head1 AUTHOR

Stefan Majewsky

Further documentation is available at the project homepage: http://holocm.org

Please report any issues and feature requests at Github: http://github.com/holocm/holo/issues

=cut
