=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

holo-users-groups - Holo plugin to provision user accounts and groups

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This plugin provisions UNIX user accounts to L<passwd(5)>, and groups to
L<group(5)>. Provisioning uses the standard commands L<useradd(8)>,
L<usermod(8)>, L<userdel(8)>, L<groupadd(8)>, L<groupmod(8)> and
L<groupdel(8)>.

Entity definitions are placed at F</usr/share/holo/users-groups/*.toml> and are
written in TOML. The following fields are accepted for users and groups:

    [[group]]
    name    = "mygroup"            # string,  the group name
    system  = false                # if true, gives --system to groupadd
    gid     = 1001                 # integer, given to groupadd as --gid

    [[user]]
    name    = "myuser"             # string,  the user name
    system  = false                # if true, gives --system to useradd
    comment = "My Own User"        # string,  given to useradd as --comment
    uid     = 1023                 # integer, given to useradd as --uid
    group   = "mygroup"            # string,  given to useradd as --gid
    groups  = [ "audio", "video" ] # strings, given to useradd as --groups
    home    = "/var/lib/myuser"    # string,  given to useradd as --home-dir
    shell   = "/usr/bin/zsh"       # string,  given to useradd as --shell

In either case, C<name> is the only required attribute. Multiple entity
definitions may apply to the same entity if they have the same C<name>
attribute. This can be useful if a base hologram creates the entity and a later
hologram requires more specific configuration for this entity. When entity
definitions are stacked on each other, they are not allowed to contradict
one another. (Different lists of auxiliary groups are allowed and will be
merged.)

The entity names for users and groups are C<user:$name> and C<group:$name>,
respectively, where C<$name> is the user name or group name.

=head2 Apply operation

Ensure that the entity is present on the system and conforms to the
entity definition. C<--force> is required to overwrite properties that conflict
between the actual state and the entity definition.

When an entity is applied for the first time, the previous state of the entity
is saved into F</var/lib/holo/users-groups/base/$entity_id.toml>. If the entity
did not exist before, the base image will only contain the type and name. The
base image will be restored by C<holo apply> when all definition files for this
entity are deleted.

Whenever an entity is successfully applied, its state will be recorded into
F</var/lib/holo/users-groups/provisioned/$entity_id.toml>. This provisioned
image will be used for diffing.

=head3 Merging of attributes

The desired state of the entity is computed by merging each attribute of the
entity definition into the base image at
F</var/lib/holo/users-groups/base/$entity_id.toml>. For most attributes, merging
succeeds if the attribute is set by only one side or the other (or by neither
side), or if the attribute is set to the same value on both sides.

As an exception, the C<groups> field (the list of auxiliary groups) of a user
definition is merged by compiling a list of all groups mentioned on either side.
For example, if C</etc/passwd> contains a user C<http> by default, which is part
of the auxiliary group C<grp1>, and you then add an entity definition like so:

    [[user]]
    name = "http"
    groups = ["grp2"]

Then after C<holo apply user:http>, the user will be part of both C<grp1>
and C<grp2>. If you want to overwrite the set of auxiliary groups from the
base image, set the C<skipBaseGroups> flag like so:

    [[user]]
    name = "http"
    groups = ["grp2"]
    skipBaseGroups = true

=head2 Diff operation

Display a diff if the current state of the entity conflicts with the entity
definition. The right side of the diff is always a serialization of the actual
state of the entity, as stated by F</etc/passwd> and/or F</etc/group>. For
example:

    diff --holo /var/lib/holo/users-groups/provisioned/user:wrongshell.toml /tmp/holo/users-groups/user:wrongshell/actual.toml
    --- /var/lib/holo/users-groups/provisioned/user:wrongshell.toml
    +++ /tmp/holo/users-groups/user:wrongshell/actual.toml
    @@ -3,4 +3,4 @@ name = "wrongshell"
     uid = 1005
     home = "/home/wrongshell"
     group = "users"
    -shell = "/bin/zsh"
    +shell = "/bin/bash"

For entities that have been applied at least once, the left side of the diff is
F</var/lib/holo/users-groups/provisioned/$entity_id.toml>. For entities that
have not been applied yet, the left side of the diff is the "desired state",
obtained by merging the entity definition with the actual state. If any
attributes have conflicting values, the entity definition takes precedence.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<holo(8)> provides the user interface for using this plugin.

=head1 AUTHOR

Stefan Majewsky

Further documentation is available at the project homepage: L<https://holocm.org>

Please report any issues and feature requests at GitHub: L<https://github.com/holocm/holo/issues>

=cut
