=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

holorc, holorc.d - configuration file for L<holo(8)>

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    /etc/holorc

    /etc/holorc.d/*

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The holorc file defines which plugins will be loaded and used by Holo, and in
which order. Blank lines, and comment lines starting with a C<#> character are ignored.

Non-blank and non-comment lines can be of one of two forms:

    plugin $PLUGIN_ID
    plugin $PLUGIN_ID=$PLUGIN_BINARY

where C<$PLUGIN_ID> is the alphanumeric identifier of the plugin, and
C<$PLUGIN_BINARY> is the path to the plugin executable file.  If the
form without an explicit C<$PLUGIN_BINARY> is given, then Holo will
use a default value of

    PLUGIN_BINARY=/usr/lib/holo/holo-$PLUGIN_ID

The plugin identifier is encoded in several paths that are relevant
for the plugin:

=over 4

=item F</usr/lib/holo/holo-$PLUGIN_ID>

Unless C<$PLUGIN_BINARY> is explicitly specified, this is plugin
executable is installed at.

=item F</usr/share/holo/$PLUGIN_ID/>

Configuration packages install resources for this plugin below this
directory.

=item F</var/lib/holo/$PLUGIN_ID/>

The plugin stores its persistent state at in the directory.

=back

The holorc file can also be provided as snippets in F</etc/holorc.d/*>.
Snippets will be parsed in alphabetical order, before the actual F</etc/holorc>
is parsed.

=head1 BEST PRACTICES

Plugins are encouraged to add themselves to F</etc/holorc> at install time by
installing a holorc snippet. For example:

    $ cat /etc/holorc.d/20-users-groups
    # This file is part of the holo-users-groups package.
    plugin users-groups

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<holo(8)>, L<holo-plugin-interface(7)>

=head1 AUTHOR

Stefan Majewsky

Further documentation is available at the project homepage: http://holocm.org

Please report any issues and feature requests at GitHub: http://github.com/holocm/holo/issues

=cut
