=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

holo - minimal configuration management

=head1 SYNOPSIS

holo B<apply> [I<-f|--force>] [I<entity> ...]

holo B<diff> [I<entity> ...]

holo B<scan> [I<-s|--short>] [I<entity> ...]

holo B<--help|--version>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Holo adds a few sprinkles on top of package management to make it suitable for
basic configuration management tasks. Its prime directive is to have all
configuration statically declared and defined within packages, which can be
installed to add new configuration, or uninstalled to remove configuration from
a system.

Package management already offers 99% of the needed tools: Metapackages (usually
called "holograms" or "holodecks" in Holo) can pull in other packages as
dependencies, thus installing the software required for a certain task, and
contain their own files to configure the software installed.

Holo adds facilties to work around shortcomings (from the configuration
management perspective) of the package management.

=head2 Provisioning of files via the configuration repository

The configuration repository at F</usr/share/holo/files> can be used to resolve
file conflicts when multiple packages (holograms or system packages) work on
the same configuration file. Each file in the repository works on a certain
B<target>, as determined by its file name:

    /usr/share/holo/files/20-webserver/etc/nginx/nginx.conf
                           ^          --+------------------
                           |            |
                           |            +-- path to target
                           |
                           +-- disambiguator

The disambiguator is always required, and allows multiple repository entries to
operate on the same target (sorted alphabetically by their disambiguator). The
pattern of putting a number at the start of the disambiguator is not required,
but useful to control the ordering of repo files.

Repository entries are applied on the B<target base>, the initial version of
the target that was found at the target path during the first C<holo apply>
run.  This target base is saved at F</var/lib/holo/files/base/$target> and will
be updated automatically when the package management installed an updated
version of the target base as F<$target.rpmnew>, F<$target.dpkg-dist>, etc.
(The exact paths depend on the package manager.)

Repository entries that are plain files or symlinks will just overwrite the
target base (or all previous entries), whereas executable repository entries
with an extra C<.holoscript> suffix can be used to modify the target base (or
the result of a previous application step). The target contents will be piped
through the script. This is typically used when the default configuration for an
application shall be used, but with some minor modifications. The following
example uses the default configuration for L<pacman(8)>, but enables the "Color"
option:

    $ cat /usr/share/holo/files/20-enable-color/etc/pacman.conf.holoscript
    #!/bin/sh
    sed 's/^#\s*Color$/Color/'

    $ sudo holo apply /etc/pacman.conf

    Working on /etc/pacman.conf
      store at /var/lib/holo/files/base/etc/pacman.conf
      passthru /usr/share/holo/files/20-enable-color/etc/pacman.conf.holoscript

When writing the new target file, ownership and permissions will be copied from
the target base, and thus from the original target file. Furthermore, a copy of
the provisioned target file is written to
F</var/lib/holo/files/provisioned/$target> for use by C<holo diff $target>.

=head2 Dealing with manual changes

When an entity (target file, user or group) provisioned by Holo is modified by
the user or another program, the next C<holo apply> run will complain about this
and refuse to overwrite the manual changes.

    $ sudo rm /etc/pacman.conf
    $ sudo usermod --uid 2003 user:test
    $ sudo holo apply /etc/pacman.conf

    Working on /etc/pacman.conf
         apply /usr/share/holo/files/01-base/etc/pacman.conf

    !! skipping target: file has been deleted by user (use --force to restore)

    Working on user:test
      found in /usr/share/holo/users-groups/01-base.toml
          with UID: 1003

    !! User has UID: 2003, expected 1003 (use --force to overwrite)

The difference between the last provisioned and the actual entity can be
inspected in detail with C<holo diff>, and as suggested in the error messages,
C<holo apply --force> will restore the entities to the state described by the
configuration repository.

=head1 OPERATIONS

All operations act on all entities (target files, users and groups) by default,
but can be restricted to certain entities by adding their names to the command
line. Target files are identified by their absolute path (e.g.
C</etc/sddm/sddm.conf>), users and groups are identifed as C<type:name>, e.g.
C<user:mysql> or C<group:sudo>).

=over 4

=item B<apply> [I<-f|--force>] [I<entity> ...]

Read the configuration repository and entity definitions and apply the selected
(or all) targets. Also, when repository files or target files have been deleted,
but there still exist target bases in F</var/lib/holo/files/base>, scrub these.

Scrubbing means to delete the target base if the target file has also been
deleted, or to restore the target base when only the repository entries have
been deleted. You can always run C<holo scan> beforehand to check what will be
done.

By default, Holo will refuse to provision entities that have been changed by the
user or by other programs. Apply B<--force> to overwrite such changes.

=item B<diff> [I<entity> ...]

Print a L<diff(1)> between the last provisioned version of each selected target
file and the actual contents of that target file.

=item B<scan> [I<-s|--short>] [I<entity> ...]

Read the configuration repository and entity definitions, and report what
C<holo apply> will do to apply these entities. This acts like a dry run for
C<holo apply> that usually does not require super-user privileges.

With B<--short>, only lists the names of all entities.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--help>

Print out usage information.

=item B<--version>

Print out Holo's version string including the release name.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<holo-build(8)> can optionally be used in conjunction with Holo to simplify
the package build process.

=head1 AUTHOR

Stefan Majewsky

Further documentation is available at the project homepage: http://holocm.org

Please report any issues and feature requests at Github: http://github.com/holocm/holo/issues

=cut
